It is sometimes proposed that direct brain–computer interfaces, particularly
implants, could enable humans to exploit the fortes of digital computing—perfect
recall, speedy and accurate arithmetic calculation, and high-bandwidth data
transmission—enabling the resulting hybrid system to radically outperform the
unaugmented brain.
64 But although the possibility of direct connections between
human brains and computers has been demonstrated, it seems unlikely that such
interfaces will be widely used as enhancements any time soon.
65
To begin with, there are significant risks of medical complications—including
infections, electrode displacement, hemorrhage, and cognitive decline—when
implanting electrodes in the brain. Perhaps the most vivid illustration to date of the
benefits that can be obtained through brain stimulation is the treatment of patients
with Parkinson’s disease. The Parkinson’s implant is relatively simple: it does not
really communicate with the brain but simply supplies a stimulating electric current
to the subthalamic nucleus. A demonstration video shows a subject slumped in a
chair, completely immobilized by the disease, then suddenly springing to life when
the current is switched on: the subject now moves his arms, stands up and walks
across the room, turns around and performs a pirouette. Yet even behind this
especially simple and almost miraculously successful procedure, there lurk
negatives. One study of Parkinson patients who had received deep brain implants
showed reductions in verbal fluency, selective attention, color naming, and verbal
memory compared with controls. Treated subjects also reported more cognitive
complaints.
66 Such risks and side effects might be tolerable if the procedure is used
to alleviate severe disability. But in order for healthy subjects to volunteer
themselves for neurosurgery, there would have to be some very substantial
enhancement of normal functionality to be gained.
This brings us to the second reason to doubt that superintelligence will be
achieved through cyborgization, namely that enhancement is likely to be far more
difficult than therapy. Patients who suffer from paralysis might benefit from an
implant that replaces their severed nerves or activates spinal motion pattern
generators.
67 Patients who are deaf or blind might benefit from artificial cochleae
and retinas.
68 Patients with Parkinson’s disease or chronic pain might benefit from
deep brain stimulation that excites or inhibits activity in a particular area of the
brain.
69 What seems far more difficult to achieve is a high-bandwidth direct
interaction between brain and computer to provide substantial increases in
intelligence of a form that could not be more readily attained by other means. Most
of the potential benefits that brain implants could provide in healthy subjects could
be obtained at far less risk, expense, and inconvenience by using our regular motor
and sensory organs to interact with computers located outside of our bodies. We do
not need to plug a fiber optic cable into our brains in order to access the Internet.